Now I'm going to give you examples of key elements
of a project definition document, this is real important,
so it'll make it much easier for you to put one together for yourself.
Purpose, as an example,
a purpose could be replace the current student
enrollment system to increase enrollments.
It's a business purpose, everything that's going to be tied around business,
not technology typically.
Goals and objectives, for example, I replaced in that system,
I will have goals, such as improve student services,
provide better financial management, avoid end of life of old hardware,
you know, old hardware like Windows XP or something.
You may have 3, you may have 13,
whatever number of goals and objectives that you need to place in
here that make this project important or sellable,
put in here.
Success criteria, as I mentioned before,
how do you think you're doing, how do you know the project was a success?
the new system with the old data, or maybe there's a certain deadline,
December 1, the system must be done, that's the success criteria.
Let's go onto the next.
What's in or out of scope?
Typically, project definitions cover everything that's in scope,
but it's also very important at times to talk about what's not in scope.
What is it we're not going to do?
That usually takes some confusion or some ambiguity out of a project,
which is good.
For example, out of scope, sales, marketing,
student grades, we don't care about that,
but in scope is student enrollment, financial management,
say cashier and accounts receivable,
so it makes it really clear what we're going to do
and what we're not going to do.
Next, assumptions,
is there anything we can assume or have as underpinnings of
the project that we need to be aware about?
For example, insufficient budget for adding IT staff,
that's interesting,
so whatever IT staff we have now is what we are only
going to have when we do the project.
No off-the-shelf solutions available.
Okay, so we know we're going to probably build it ourselves,
that's an assumption.
Must migrate legacy data, that old data must be in the new system,
so we're going to have to think about that as well.
So it's very important to itemize all your assumptions of the project,
and again, you're going to have more than 3,
you might have 10-30, or whatever it is,
to succinctly articulate the assumptions for the project.
Recommended approach, for example,
develop use cases and screen sketches about how you might
satisfy the requirements of the system.
You might talk about custom development in terms of,
is it going to be a Java platform, or a.
NET, or some different types of tools, what's the initial architecture?
Well, we think it's going to be a web application.
So recommended approach is just some very high-level ideas about
how you would actually accomplish this project,
what would you have to do, you might need to buy some hardware,
you might need to build some software, you might need to engage a vendor,
so just maybe there's even two or three approaches as option one,
option two, option three,
again to give some indication to the senior management
about what are the different approaches that would satisfy
the requirements of the project.
Next, is business drivers, for example in this case,
unsupported hardware and infrastructure.
Maybe you have some old hardware like HP 3000,
or MVS, or some old IBM things, things like that,
in other words, that's old infrastructure that you need to get off of,
end of life.
Inadequate service of support to students in this case,
in other words, maybe you have areas that you need to improve the service,
so that's a big business driver, here's why we need to do this project.
Inadequate access to financials,
typically you need financial information to run a
company or to run an organization,
and it's holding back the information that might allow key
decisions to be made for this organization or company.
So these are some key business drivers,
these are usually high up in your project definition document,
and less linked tightly to the business,
and the business drivers, or the strategies of that company.
These are the things that will resinate with the senior executives,
so try to get these right.
Budget, that's real important too to these senior executives.
In this case, maybe as an example,
there's a three year budget available and that's it.
Okay, well how might we allocate that budget?
Maybe we're going to go 25%, then 40 for year 2,
then maybe 35% for year 3, so these again are just rough allocations,
just an idea.
Maybe the whole budget is $5 million.
So for budget, you just want to get a rough idea of how much money there is,
or maybe the money is spread over a number of years,
things like that.
Schedule,
it's another very important one near and dear to
executives and senior management, must be done on this particular date,
things like that.
Now what I might suggest in a schedule,
is do some sort of incremental delivery or some milestones so that,
well, maybe we're going to do this by October 1,
then we'll do these other things by November 1,
and maybe lastly, by December 1.
It's very important to kind of lay things out maybe a little more incrementally,
and we're going to talk about that later in the project as well.
Next, we have return on investment, and this can be done very simply.
A $500, 000 investment will return $750, 000 in 6 months' time.
That's pretty good, that's what called a 50% ROI,
or Return On Investment, net profit divided by investment x 100.
So for those key executives or management that you
might report to for this project, they may want to know what's the return?
Would you spend $1 million and only get $10 back, probably not.
This information will help determine your go/no go decisions.
Constraints, for example, a project must begin by July 1,
otherwise certain things may not happen,
or maybe a vendor may not be available that's going to support you,
things like that.
Data migration must be performed during the summer,
low-usage months, okay, that's a constraint.
So you could layout these constraints that'll help guide how you
might ultimately end up implementing the project.
Risks, another very, very important one.
If we don't do the project, what will happen?
In this case, the old hardware may fail as an example.
This will affect our business continuity,
could we support the business,
and maybe the budget is only available for this fiscal year.
A lot of times budgets will fluctuate and vary fiscal year
over fiscal year or maybe quarter by quarter,
so find out when is the money available,
when isn't it available, that might be a risk as well to the project.
Next, stakeholders.
Now this typically is senior management,
executives, people of importance, VIPs, and for an example,
it could be the dean of the university, maybe IT operations director,
or a CFO, a Chief Financial Officer.
Stakeholders could be one person, could be a half a dozen people,
so know who your stakeholders are, identify them in the document,
they're the ones that need to understand your document
or say your PowerPoint presentation,
and they will be the ones that will typically say go,
or no go, or do more analysis.
Preliminary schedule, based on all the information you've gathered,
try to come up with a very rough preliminary schedule.
Maybe I'll start project planning on January 1,
and maybe by February 1, I'll have some specifications developed,
and maybe we'll release the system in April.
You know, just given on what I know, requirements,
resources available, maybe a very rough preliminary schedule,
this'll help the stakeholders decide what to do.
Also, you want to come up with preliminary estimates,
maybe I'm going to need to engage a consulting company for $100,
000.
00, I might need to buy some infrastructure for $150, 000.
00,
and then I need to maybe bring on some contractors or a consulting
company to actually do the software development,
that might be $250, 000.
So hey, here's what I think this project might take to go do.
Next, policies and standards.
Many times on a project, you must comply with policies and standards.
They may be company policies and standards,
or governmental, state, federal, you name it.
So for an example, a security policy must be PCI compliant,
and also maybe from a standard standpoint,
must follow the university application lifecycle management standards,
so you always want to include any policies and
standards that it must be complied with,
and if there are none, say none.
So we don't like to leave categories out ever.
All the categories, or subcategories,
or all these key elements need to be included in your document,
and of note then, if they do not apply for this particular project,
say none, that way you know it was considered and documented.
Legal and regulatory, it's another nice area.
From a legal standpoint, maybe it needs to be ADA compliant,
American with Disabilities, that particular compliancy may be very important,
maybe for your user interface.
Also, maybe there's some regulatory requirements.
In this case, I said none as my example previous.
You always want to keep your categories and subcategories in place,
and if it doesn't apply, say none.
Competitive drivers, many times your company might be running great,
but run into some competitive issues, and therefore,
in this case as an example,
other universities enable a much better student enrollment experience.
Sometimes if things are hard to do, they call that friction in the business.
If it's a lot of work or friction to enroll in your school,
they may choose to more easily enroll in another school.
Greater competition among schools, a lot of competition today,
a lot of courses being offered online in particular,
so maybe we need to beef up our game and ask maybe one of the drivers for this project as well.